# APPROACHES TO THE STUDY OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS: IDEALIST, REALIST, MARXIST, FUNCTIONALIST AND SYSTEMS THEORY. 

## Theories of International Politics: Idealist 

Explain the various facets of the idealist approach to the study of international relations. Comment on its contemporary relevance. (2024/10 Marks)
(2024/10 Marks)


What are the core assumptions of idealism as an approach to study International Relations? Explain its continuing relevance in peace building. (20/10)


## Theories of International Politics: Marxist 
"Marxist approach to the study of international relations has lost its relevance in the post-cold war era." Comment. (21/10)

Explain the relevance of the Marxist approach in the context of globalization. (19/20)

How does Marxist approach explain contemporary International Relations? (200 words) (13/15)

Do you agree with the notion that Marxist approach to the study of International relations is largely based on economic reductionism? Give reasons. (08/60)

Comment: Marxist approach to international politics. (02/20)

## Theories of International Politics: Realist 
Neo-liberalism lightened neo-realism's dark view of international politics. Comment. (2025, 10 Marks)

What do you mean by offensive and defensive realism? (2023/15)

What is the realist prescription to the States to ensure their survival in an anarchical world? (22/15)

Discuss the commonalities between the Marxist and Realist approach to the study of International Politics.(22/10)

Discuss the emergence of neo-realism and its basic tenets. (2021)

Bring out the major differences between the Classical Realism of Hans Morgenthau and the Neorealism of Kenneth Waltz. (18/10)

Is Realist Approach the best method to understand International Relations? Examine this in the context of Classical Realism. (17/20)

Identify the major differences between the classical realism of Hans J. Morgenthau and the neorealism of Kenneth Waltz. Which approach is best suited for analyzing international relations after the Cold War? (15/10)

Write a note on Intellectual precursors of Realism. (200 words) (13/15)

What are the great debates between 'classical' and 'modern' realisis? Is there any thin line of continuity between these two traditions? (250 words) (12/20)

Examine the post - modernist critique of Realism in international politics. (10/20)

Discuss the realist and neo-realist approaches in the study of International relations. (08/60)

Clearly explain Realist Theory to the study of International Politics. (03/60)

"Realism as an approach to international relations helps to explain why states fight are threaten each other, but it is less effective in explaining much of the cooperative behaviour we see......." Comment. (96/20)

Examine the main assumptions of the Realist theory. (91/60)

## Theories of International Politics: Systems, Functionalist 

### system
Discuss the importance of the Systems Theory in modern political analysis. (97/60)
Estimate the utility of the systems theory in social sciences. (93/60)

Systems Approach (22/10)
Discuss the Systems Approach to the Study of International Relations. (04/60)
#### world system theory
Explain the central tenets of the World-Systems Theory. (2024/10 Marks)

Examine the World Systems Approach as developed by Immanuel Wallerstein. (17/15)

#### David Easton
Discuss David Easton's model of systems analysis. (15/15)
#### Mortan A kalpan
"Morton A. Kaplan's system theory is contrary to the fundamental precepts of systems approach." Comment.
(15/15)

Explain the use of systems approach in international relations and examine the relevance of Kaplan's system analysis. (11/30)


"A scientific politics can develop only if the materials of politics are treated in terms of systems of actions." In the light of this statement of Kaplan with regard to application of systems theory to political science, critically examine the drawbacks of its application. (99/60)

Examine the explanatory potential of Kaplan's systems theory of explaining the phenomenon of international politics in the present context. (98/60)
### functionalist

In what ways does the functionalist approach in International relations help in maintaining peace and order in global politics? (2023/15)

Critically examine the Functionalist approach to the study of International Relations. (18/15)

Critically examine the functional and system approaches to the study of international relations. (16/10)

'Building 'peace by pieces' is the basis of functionalism'. Elaborate. (200 words) (13/15)

### structural functional 
Discuss the structural-functional analysis of politics. (98/60)

### Theories of International Politics: Decision making 
Analyse and evaluate the role of decision-making theory as a tool of foreign policy analysis. (06/60)
"The decision-making is only a partial theory of international politics." Critically examine the above statement.
(99/60)
Discuss, with illustrations, the way decision making is influuenced by the external and internal environment as
perceived by the decision maker. (94/60)
### Theories of International Politics:Game Theory 
Comment: Game Theory for the study of International Politics and its limitations. (05/20)
